Against Calvin's Booklet
in which he attempts to show that
Heretics ought to be restrained by
right of the sword.

By Sebastian Castellio.

Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts.
1 Cor. 4.

Prov. 14.
The words of the wicked lie in wait for blood: but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.

Psalm 2.
And now, ye kings, act prudently: be instructed, ye judges of the earth.

In the Year of the Lord 1612.


To the Kindly Reader.

New diseases must have new remedies applied to them; but as often as we see someone seized by an old disease, we apply the old remedies, those customarily used for such a disease. That sickness—or rather that lethal disease, namely Tyranny over the consciences of others—was an old one, and had now for many years held its dominion in the minds of many, and had savagely slaughtered countless people, both in these regions and in others. There was hope that the Reformation of the Church in the European sphere might be able to relieve this evil, and in some measure it certainly did relieve it; for those pressed under this yoke of conscience opposed themselves bravely to this tyranny with the spiritual sword, and so frightened and drew their Magistrates away from such persecution by sacred sermons and salutary admonitions that this lethal disease was forced in many places to go into exile and to seek other dwellings. But behold the inconstancy of men: for those very ones who beyond the rest deprecated this disease while they were pressed by it, now, freed from it by the grace of God, have attempted to consummate in the flesh what they had excellently begun in the spirit, and have strenuously striven to cast again upon another's neck this intolerable yoke of conscience, which by the help of God they bravely shook off from their own neck—with no less cruelty than had earlier been practiced against themselves. An example is that most celebrated Doctor of the Genevan Church, John Calvin, in that persecution of his against Michael Servetus, whom on account of his faith—or rather his unfaith—he detained, against whom he prosecuted, and whom he then burned alive. He calls Servetus's unfaith blasphemy, which is something far greater than unfaith. I do not here deny that unfaith is a grave sin, and blasphemy a still graver one; nor do I offer myself as patron or defender of Servetus's errors, which I believe it were better to press down deep beneath the earth, lest they emit certain pestilential vapors. This only do I say: that Servetus's deed had to do with faith, or rather unfaith, and concerned the sense of sacred scripture. He was a blasphemer against God (if what Calvin writes is true—for Servetus's own books are not extant, nor do I greatly desire them), and yet he believed himself to be exalting God. A great error, certainly, and one joined with public harm—and yet an error arising from ignorance; otherwise, what madness, what frenzy, to throw oneself before so horrible a kind of death on account of some opinion (which, better instructed, he might have repudiated and abjured)? And so he chose rather to pour out his life for a certain false persuasion of the truth than to live with some worm of his conscience (however badly taught). By his death, therefore, he persuaded himself that he was glorifying God. But that persuasion (you will say) was false. Granted; yet to Servetus it was not false, otherwise he would surely have fled death. Of rebellion, of faction, or of the crime of treason—at least against Geneva—he cannot be charged or convicted: it was therefore solely on account of an opinion he had conceived. But you say, a depraved, impious, blasphemous opinion. Be it so; yet it was one which he believed not impious, and believed to make for the honor of God, and which he tried to confirm by sacred Scripture—indeed, for which he thought he must give up his life and so taste a dreadful death, that he might thus serve the glory of God, the very God whom his adversaries also thought they were serving by burning him.

The question is asked whether this is not a certain intolerable and illicit Tyranny over conscience, and a certain unheard-of and more-than-bestial cruelty. I for my part pronounce that it is so. Calvin tried to extenuate and defend this deed of his in public print [Calvire]. Beza too did the same, at greater length. But the book of each man has been refuted by many with the most solid arguments, drawn from the word of God. Beyond the rest, however, this man here showed himself the strongest champion and vindicator of liberty of conscience, excelling in learned piety and pious learning: S. Castellio, whose labors and vigils upon this argument against Calvin we set before you, that you may thereafter judge the more rightly of this business. Someone may ask: to what end this resuscitation of a four-days-dead and already foul-smelling Lazarus—that is, this renewal of old errors? But let him take it thus. If that most brilliant Sun, set in heaven, looks upon any region which mortally hates, detests, and has expelled that heresy concerning the killing of heretics (for this is the proper name of Tyranny over Consciences), certainly that region is this our region, these our Provinces joined together by the closest bond of confederation. Men have suffered much, much blood has been poured out, many treasuries exhausted, to drive away this most foul and bloodthirsty beast: all this our region has seen and experienced. A few years ago this Tyranny was not yet known to any; for the few Theologians, more fervid than is right, who still cherished this Monster in their bosom, concealed it as much as they could.

But behold, that old schemer Satan, under a certain bland and specious pretext of the glory of God and of Zeal for the Church, creeping in by craft and as it were through certain tunnels, aims at the throne of God, that he may thus again lord it over and preside over the consciences and faith of men. For that old Treatise of T. Beza, On the Killing of Heretics, written and published in French and Latin many years ago, was translated out of Latin into Dutch by certain Ministers of the word in Friesland, with a certain preface too sharp and reeking of blood, and was committed to print and divulged; which treatise even today some assert to be placed beyond all hazard of reproof and calumny (for no Minister of the reformed religion has hitherto been found who would oppose himself to this doctrine, if you please)—and hence it is that the languor, once driven from our body, little by little again seizes it, and infects it more and more. Many too were not ashamed, led by the thread of their error and fervor, to bring forward in another certain Treatise the examples of Servetus, Neuser, Gentilis, and others, to prove what they wish; and to what end all these things tend, do you, kindly Reader, weigh well with yourself. That I have nothing in common with Servetus, Neuser, Gentilis, or others of that flour, He knows who knows all things; nor would I be patron to them. This one thing torments me and afflicts my mind: that those who are held for heretics are killed so cruelly; and I strive with all my might to keep this bloodthirsty stain away from this most noble body of our confederated regions, and from our well-composed and tranquil Churches; and I give this Treatise for the present (intending perhaps hereafter to give yet another also) as a certain old and present antidote against this pestilential plague now being reborn and daily growing. Read, Reader, and weigh it in the even balance of judgment, and you will surely feel that this doctrine is adulterine, and ruinous alike to soul and body and region; but that, on the contrary, it does very much to propagate true doctrine, for the salvation of souls and the security of bodies, and for the blessed and highest tranquility and peace of our Provinces, if anyone bravely oppose himself to it.

Do you then study to make away with the son of perdition by another means than the spirit of the mouth of God? Truth conquers by its own arms, which are spiritual and divinely mighty for the overthrowing of strongholds: by overturning reasonings, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and by bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, as the Apostle says. Doctors who abandon this—as though it were not of itself sufficient and strong to convince enemies—err, and sin grievously against the truth itself, which they trust too little because they are ignorant of its power; and against Charity itself, which they do not exercise enough toward their neighbor. They kill the body indeed, but by killing they do not save the soul—nay rather they destroy it, those who take away some unfaithful person from the midst. Hypocrites indeed they make many, but Christians none at all. And what if (as nearly always happens) they kill a sheep for a wolf, an orthodox man for a heretic, a faithful servant and witness of God for a Blasphemer? Is there anything to make these our more rigid Theologians safe and certain that this will not happen? Where, I ask, are the diplomas for this deed? Is it in sacred scripture? Nowhere indeed will you find this privilege granted to them. For sacred Scripture invites men gently to embrace the truth, it does not compel by force or death; and it expressly forbids this extirpation of heresy and killing of heretics—which is shown openly and lucidly not only in this Treatise but also in the little book against Beza.

Let there therefore be a judgment of the Church on both sides, and that in a Christian and candid manner out of the word of God, as is fitting. But what if the Synod, what if the very Church—in whose hands they wish all judgment to be—should neglect this, oppose itself bravely to its Monitors, refuse to hear the other side and to admit correction? Which, against the decree and good pleasure of the Lords of the Estates, it was possible to see in the refusal of the Revision (as they call it) of the human Confession and Catechism, to which they even compelled not a few on the contrary side to subscribe. What if it itself even err gravely? Of which, alas, too many examples can be brought—and among others, that of the Jewish Church, which through error slaughtered the Prophets and Apostles, and condemned Christ himself, that immaculate and harmless lamb, as a Blasphemer (which charge is even today, with great rashness and impudence, thrown at many Pious men), and crucified him among the malefactors. Has not the Roman Church itself also entered upon this bloodthirsty way? But ours, you will say, the reformed Church—Would to God He grant us this Reformation and will it to be lasting! But just as it is agreed that those Churches I have named have erred, together with the Helvetic and the Genevan, so too our own (being one which consists of men not perfect on every side and capable of erring, not of certain omniscient Gods, and is not always pastured and governed by the best—for Pastors are often changed into Wolves, and Wolves often succeed to Pastors, as Calvin and Beza testify)—our own too can err gravely in these articles concerning the killing of heretics and the casting of a bridle upon conscience. What then is to become of us amid all these errors of the Churches? Who, like some incorrupt Judge sent down from heaven, amid so great a discrepancy of opinions, will judge concerning some doctrine, whether it be heretical or not? Who will judge concerning the heretics themselves, who they are? The Magistrate? By no means: for Beza does not allow this. For he writes: For these are the parts of the Church, not of Princes: and therefore Princes ought to observe that they contain themselves within the bounds and barriers of their power, namely that they dare not judge concerning Heresy. But even today the greatest part, with that long order of Pontifical men distinguished by ranks and dignities, rattles on about nothing but the Church, Councils, and Synods. But here answer me, I pray: shall then Churches and Synods of this sort, in such a state of affairs and so great a diversity of opinions, be adversaries, plaintiffs, and Judges in their own cause (which we detested in the Roman church)? Who will bear this with an even mind? What else, I ask, will arise from this than a kind of Midianite war? Or some new Papacy, a new yoke of conscience, a bridle on truth, a certain Tyranny, and a certain extinction of Prophecy (which ought to be free)? Especially when the Church thus has the Magistrate among its own parties, so that these are its nurslings and "kiss the son"—that is, in Beza's interpretation, kill the heretics. But this too will be the kiss of Judas or of Joab, and, as Nazianzen says, "For Christ they will be against Christ."

Men hear daily—many too with great grief—certain more fervid and bilious Theologians crying out everywhere with a Stentorian voice and inveighing even against their own brothers and colleagues, who in explaining some passages of sacred scripture do not agree with them in all things; and playing out this play of theirs before many, so that these are held for Atheists and Heretics, comparing them now to Pelagius, now to Arius, Samosatenus, Socinus, or Servetus (who was burned alive). But what fruit will come of these uncontrolled words and rash Judgments, all the pious and prudent easily understand—especially in these regions, in these dissensions of our Churches, in which one easily condemns another, and so paints him in his own colors before all, and especially the Lords of the Estates, that he runs into their hatreds and enmities and is subjected to unheard-of penalties.

We hope, therefore, that this Treatise will be of the greatest use: both that those who, trusting too much in human wits and in the estimation and authority of two doctors (namely Calvin and Beza), have been led astray, may be brought back into the right way; and also that the foul errors of the Church which have crept into it and can still creep in may be demonstrated and kept away from it; and that that fervid zeal, by which Kings and princes are roused to persecute and kill heretics, may be repressed. Finally, that the Lords of the Estates and other Magistrates of the confederated Provinces (for whose wise government and happy leadership thanks can never be worthily enough rendered to God Most Good and Great, even in this business) may, by this bare demonstration of the truth, learn to beware more and more for themselves of those subtle enemies of the liberty of faith, the Theologians; and may never wish to abuse that dignity and supreme power given them by God, at the arbitrary will and pleasure of certain Ecclesiastics (which mostly happens in the kingdom of Antichrist), and so become the blind executioners and Ministers of another's cruelty.

For this insane cruelty of theirs is as akin to Evangelical doctrine and Christian Charity (of which nevertheless they profess themselves the doctors and imitators) as Belial is to Christ, who has been a murderer from the very founding of the world.

It is certainly a marvel that Theologians—Jesuits as much as others—who urge Predestination so very far, are in the killing of heretics much more cruel than others; whereas it would have been more fitting for them to have the more pity on those whose heresy they know to be in their fates, who, even if they wished, could not feel otherwise. And so, kindly Reader, if you cannot ward off this Tyranny, at least do not by your vote confirm and establish it, and thus sprinkle your soul too with innocent blood; rather pray God that He may by His power and wisdom press down and remove this doctrine, ruinous to souls, bodies, and kingdoms, and give a better mind to those who urge it so greatly, and bestow upon all our Princes and Magistrates His grace and that wisdom of Solomon, whereby he, between the false and the true mother (who vindicated the life of her beloved son from the hand of the false one, who had already consented to its slaying), discerned with a spirit of discretion. Farewell, kindly Reader, and use and enjoy what we give.


Preface

It is to be wished that good Men should have great authority, and bad men none; for the reason that Men are much led by authority, and for the most part decide concerning uncertain matters relying on the authority of someone alone. Whence it comes about that, if he who is strong in authority is a good man, there is less sin; but if he is bad, there is grave and frequent sin. But since in this perverse life authority generally depends on the multitude, and the multitude is wont to attribute most to those who serve its own profit or pleasure or honor, and are renowned in fame among outsiders (a thing which serves the multitude itself for an ornament)—and recoils from those by whom it is reproved, or who do not indulge it—it generally comes about that flatterers and dissemblers are held in price, while sincere and severe men, and despisers of fame, are despised.

And again, since nothing is so covered that it is not sometime uncovered, since the present sweetness of flattery afterward begets bitter pains, it comes about that after men, blinded by flatteries, have fallen back into great losses, they recognize and detest the flatterers, and praise and defend good men, whose counsel they earlier repudiated because it was adverse to the flesh. Hence it generally happens that good men are praised after death, bad men blamed; which in life generally happens to the contrary, that good men are blamed, bad men praised. The fault is in the ignorance of men, who prefer the brevity of present pleasure to the perpetuity of the future—just as a boy prefers one pear at present to an inheritance in the future. But if men were men, they would do the contrary, and so would avoid the greatest evils. Very many examples occur. Noah in his time lacked authority, which had he had it, that age would not have been so wretchedly extinguished by the Flood. The same happened to Lot, whom the Sodomites, having spurned, perished. The same to the Prophets, and to John the Baptist, and to Christ, and to the Apostles; despising whom, the Jews cast themselves into the longest and gravest calamities—following, namely, the bland and flattering, and likewise bloody, counsels of the Scribes and Pharisees. Now Christ taught that it would come to pass that at his coming there should be such a state as was in the times of Noah and Lot—that is, that there should be the highest security, and contempt of those who call men away from sinning. But if the coming of the Lord is at hand, those ought to be most suspect to us who are in that rank in which the Scribes and Pharisees were, lest by their bland counsels they precipitate us into everlasting losses; and most of all we ought to make much of, or even seek out, those who are like Noah or Lot—that is, who call us away from sins, even though their counsels at present be bitter. It will altogether happen in our times as it happened then: those who study the salvation of men will be despised and harassed; on the contrary, false Prophets will be held in price, because they will flatter the flesh. If anyone has ears, let him hear and weigh these things. Small is the number of those who wish to be wise: for these let us labor. Those who have despised sound counsel will afterward seek the same in vain. Blessed are they who neither flatter themselves nor admit the flatteries of others.

To what end these things have been said by me, I will now relate. Today John Calvin is of the highest authority—which indeed I could wish him greater, if I saw him a man of mild and merciful disposition. But because by his recent deed he has openly shown that he thirsts for the blood of many, and by his writing has created peril for many pious men, I, who both by nature and by training wholly abhor blood (as all ought to abhor it), will openly show to the world (if God will) his attempts, that those who do not wish to perish may cease to be deceived by him and be recalled into the way. There was burned at Geneva, on account of opinions concerning religion, last year, which was 1553, on the 26th day of October, Michael Servetus, a Spaniard, with Calvin, the Pastor of that Church, as instigator and author. When Servetus's execution was divulged, many were offended, especially Italians and Frenchmen: first, that a man had been killed on account of opinions concerning religion; then, that he had been killed so cruelly; third, that it was with a Pastor as author; fourth, that Calvin had conspired in killing him with his own enemies—for this too was reported; fifth, that his books had been burned at Frankfurt; sixth, that after death he had been condemned by the preachers to Gehenna. Hearing these things, Calvin published a Book against Servetus, to clear himself and to refute him, and moreover to show that he ought to be restrained with the sword. What Calvin attempts to accomplish in that book, few see. For it is so painted over and colored with a false appearance of piety that it is not easy to detect, especially for those who are devoted to Calvin. This Book, then, I have now undertaken to examine and to explain, that I may recall some, if it can be done, from error. But let no one make a tumult against me in this place; let the Reader weigh the reasons, and, with his mind called away from the dignity of persons, be wholly intent upon the truth (which otherwise cannot be perceived). I will bring it about, God willing, that the attempts of this man may henceforth lie open to those who do not wish to be blind. Calvin will perhaps say, after his manner, that I am a Disciple of Servetus: but let that terrify no one. I do not defend the Doctrine of Servetus, but I expose the false doctrine of Calvin. And so concerning the Trinity, concerning Baptism, and the other arduous questions I will not dispute, since I do not have the Books of Servetus—burned, indeed, by Calvin's diligence—so that I might see from them what he felt; but in the rest, which are outside that Servetan disputation, I will so demonstrate Calvin's errors that anyone may perceive him to be groping after the thirst of blood in the very noon-day. And I will deal with him not in the way he himself dealt with Servetus—whom, after he had burned him together with his books, he lacerates dead, and refutes his errors even by citing (if it please the gods above) the pages of the book which he burned, and in many places—just as if someone should burn a House, and then bid us seek certain vessels from that House, and point out the chambers or chests. But we will not burn Calvin's books: both the author and the Book live, and indeed it was published by him in Latin and in French, that no one may be able to plead that anything has been corrupted by us. And I will set down his very words, and the passages about which I wish to discourse I will mark with numbers, wherever there is need; then I will set the numbers corresponding to them before my words, that thus the matter may be briefly perceived. And first I will set down the title, which runs thus.

Calvin 1.
A Defense of the orthodox faith concerning the sacred Trinity, against the prodigious errors of Michael Servetus the Spaniard, where it is shown that Heretics are to be restrained by right of the sword, and that punishment was justly and deservedly inflicted at Geneva, by name, upon so impious a man.

Vaticanus.
He names the heretics from error, as if he said thus: I will write against the errors of Servetus, to show that those who err—that is, heretics—are to be restrained by right of the sword, just as the erring Servetus is restrained by the sword. That this is Calvin's meaning will afterward appear: namely, that he wishes those who err gravely to be killed, unless they are willing to descend into Calvin's opinion. And this is what he does throughout this whole disputation about heretics (as we shall show): that whomever Calvin, with his followers, judges heretics, they may be sent as companions to Servetus. Which if it be done, all men of Christian name will have to be burned, except the Calvinians—that is, those who hold Calvin's institution ratified—which he then attacks thus.

Calvin 2.
Although among the other portents of errors by which Satan has attempted in this age to overwhelm the Light of the reborn Gospel, particularly detestable is (1) the heap of impieties which Michael Servetus vomited forth in his published Books, yet before this I did not think the man ought to be refuted by a professional [refutation], because there lay beneath such absurdity in his (2) deliriums that, with no one opposing, I hoped they would (3) of their own accord go off into smoke.

Vaticanus.
1. He calls "impieties" what in the title he called "errors," and here "deliriums," which cannot agree with one another. For an error cannot properly be called impiety, unless you wish to call Paul impious while he persecutes the Church, or Thomas while he does not believe Christ to have risen—which were certainly the gravest errors. The Sacred letters call those impious who sin knowingly and with an impious mind, not overcome by weakness or seduced through ignorance: of which sort was Cain, who killed his brother, or Saul, who persecuted David, when nevertheless he had confessed with his own mouth that he was doing him an injury. For such men Christ does not pray, who says he does not pray for the world. But for those who err he does pray, when he says: Forgive them, for they know not what they do—that is, they sin by error. For if they had known him, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. (2) But to call the delirious "impious" is the act of a man well-nigh delirious himself. For he in whom piety does not fall, in him impiety does not fall: but piety does not fall in a delirious man, no more than in a beast: therefore impiety does not fall in a delirious man. (3) And certainly they would have gone off into smoke, if they had been absurd deliriums. For men are not so delirious as to be captivated by absurd deliriums and futile fooleries, as he himself a little later calls them. He then proceeds, a few things interposed.

Calvin 3.
1. Afterward, from the report of good men, I recognized that I had been deceived.

Vaticanus.
Calvin erred, therefore, and committed something, so that it must be said, "I did not think." If anyone had earlier said this of him, he would perhaps have been held a blasphemer by Calvin's disciples. He proceeds then a little later, where he had accused the curiosity of the ancients.

Calvin 4.
What today? The greater part, human shame too cast off, openly mocks God: (1) into his tremendous mysteries it bursts no less wantonly than if swine should thrust their snouts into a precious treasure.

Vaticanus.
1. He seems to speak against himself. God's truly tremendous mysteries are the Trinity, Predestination, and Election. About these matters this man affirms as though he had been in Paradise, and so thornily does he teach about the Trinity in this book that he does nothing but shake the consciences of the simple with this curiosity, and call them into doubt. But about predestination he taught so crudely that he led countless men into as great a security as there was before the Flood, or in the time of Lot—so that the world, prepared by him, might be the more securely overwhelmed by the coming of the Lord.

Calvin 5.
Many contaminate the profession of the Gospel by an impure and wicked life.

Vaticanus.
He calls "impure and wicked" adulterers, drunkards, and the rest of that kind, who are truly impure. But he does not understand that no kind of men is more impure than hypocrites, who under a sheep's skin devour the sheep.

Calvin 6.
And, to be silent about other things, we see how (1) audaciously very many run wanton in their fabrications, and how an insatiable lust for new things, with insane itching, presses on and drives some men.

Vaticanus.
As he himself does, who is so audacious that to contradict his fabrications is thought at Geneva to be a sacrilege. And so it is not permitted even to baptize infants with other words than those prescribed by Calvin, nor to sing psalms on other days. He himself has innovated more in ten years than the whole church in six hundred; although in his Institutes he had inveighed most bitterly against such innovators, so that he seems to have wished to drive them out in order that he himself might enter into their place. I will set down his words from the first Institutes (which were printed at Basel in the year '36), Chapter 6, page 429.

Calvin 7.
1. But the power of making laws—since it was itself unknown to the Apostles, and so often taken away from the ministers of the church by the word of God—I marvel by what right anyone dares, beyond the example of the Apostles and against the manifest prohibition of God, to draw it to himself. For it is not ambiguous what James writes: (2) He who judges his brother, judges the Law; and he who judges the Law is not an observer of the Law, but a judge: But there is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. And a little after: Peter too, when he admonishes pastors of their office, exhorts them so to feed the flock that they (3) do not exercise dominion over the clergy [cleros]. Behold cut off, and torn up from the very root, whatever power those claim for themselves who wish to exalt themselves without the word of God. For nothing was given to the Apostles whereby they might establish their own doctrine and their own kingdom, but only whereby they might magnify the kingdom and the doctrine [of God].

Vaticanus.
1. But it was known to you, who made Laws at Geneva eight years ago, by whose authority you both used it against others, and most recently, a few days after the death of Servetus, attacked Bertellier; and you demanded from the Magistrate a defense out of the Laws which you yourself had made and the Magistrate had sanctioned, against others; and you sent these same laws to those Helvetic Churches of yours, that they might pronounce out of those laws of yours concerning the excommunication of Bertellier, just as a little before they had pronounced concerning Servetus. But if you should say that you did not establish those new laws, but settled all things out of the word of God, first it will be objected that then nothing ought to have been written by you, but the laws should have been left as they were laid down by God; that the snout ought not to have been so wantonly thrust into the precious treasure. Then it will be asked of you, where the word of God teaches that fixed psalms are to be sung on fixed days according to Calvin's prescription, and many other things which are so observed there by your prescription that to go against them is more a sacrilege than if someone sinned against the Holy Spirit. (2) You, forsooth, did not judge Servetus and countless others. (3) He himself so domineers that by many he is simply called "Lord." It was once disputed among the very preachers whether Calvin ought to be called "Lord," while others were called "Master," and the domination prevailed, that he should be called "Lord." For there came into his house a certain poor, simple man who asked whether "the brother" was at home; to whom it was answered: "What, brother? He is great enough to be called 'Lord' by you." Finally, Calvin so domineers at Geneva that to offend him is far more dangerous than to offend the king of France in his very palace. These things are known to countless men cast out by him and wretchedly harassed, whom to enumerate would be a long history. Let him now show that the Apostles either did or taught any such thing. But let us return to the Book we have undertaken.

Calvin 8.
For these vices, therefore, God repays a just and due wage, while he allows men—otherwise not stupid, and furnished with some learning—to slip by a certain brutish sloth into foul and shameful errors. This, although not in good time, as was fitting, I have pondered for the sake of applying a remedy. Yet when, taught by the matter itself, I recognized it, I did not so much wonder that there were many in (1) Italy infected with that disease. Which I say not only the (2) fair and modest men of that nation will take in good part, but in correcting the (3) evil of their fatherland (which would that it were not common to other regions also, and especially to our France) they will readily subscribe to me.

Vaticanus.
It is worth the trouble to perceive why he says this especially of (1) Italians and Frenchmen. The other nations know Calvin more from his writings than from his morals. Hence it comes about that many men of remote nations hold him for a God, because they think his life corresponds to his profession. But out of Italy and France many flock to Geneva, and some, by long acquaintance, detect Calvin's disposition. As this was disclosed before, so indeed in the case of Servetus it was made open. For at the time when Servetus was there in chains, there came thither by chance a certain Italian, a celebrated jurist [Ictus], to whom, when the matter of Servetus had been told, said that he had never been of that opinion, that anyone should die for opinions however heretical, and adduced his reasons for it. Then concerning the opinion of Servetus, who had said that Jesus Christ, even as regards his humanity, was the true and natural Son of God, begotten of God himself and of the virgin, he discoursed some things, and said that this opinion did not greatly displease him—nay, that from boyhood he had always so felt. But those brothers, straightway offended, said that he was in the opinion of Servetus, and that, if he persevered, he was to be avoided as a heretic. He, as one in suspense about a very arduous matter, began to ask them to grant him an assembly, where he might openly set forth his reasoning; or at least to conciliate for him the ears of Calvin (whose authority he himself had always most highly esteemed), that he might be more openly instructed by him about a matter of such moment. But he obtained nothing. And so, gravely moved about the matter, he departed, and wrote letters about it to the Vicentine brethren. Moreover a certain Lelius Socinus sent letters to Geneva to a friend of his, in which he wrote that the blood of Abel cried out to God, and that it would come to pass that Cain should not find peace on earth. Likewise Bernardino Ochino, returning from England, arrived at Geneva on the day after Servetus was burned; there came to him one who told him of the death of Servetus. But Bernardino spoke in such a way that it appeared the deed was not approved by him: which thing rendered him hated. To these things there came from the Rhaetian brethren certain verses, in which it was said that one Servetus had been extinguished by Calvin, but that countless others had revived; that his body had been cremated, but his soul had remained intact; that if Christ himself came to Geneva, it would come to pass that he would be crucified; that one ought no longer go to Geneva for Christian Liberty, for there was there another Pope, but one who roasted men alive, whereas the Roman one first suffocated them. For nearly all the Italians, even those who approve Calvin's doctrine, were then most gravely offended by that cruelty; which also in great part happened in France. This matter rendered Calvin more odious to these nations.

(2) He calls "fair and modest" those who subscribe to his cruelty. (3) And what they have nothing better, that Calvin calls the evil of the fatherland—namely, that they are unwilling rashly to believe just any man. But of the Italians' greatest vice Calvin makes no mention: I speak of the lust for vengeance, with which, to be sure, many Italians labor. For Italians are by nature either very good or very bad. But since that vice is so common to Calvin with the Italians that he has snatched the palm from them, he prudently is silent about it.

Calvin 9.
This is a common disease, and reigns nearly everywhere: that, as each man is strong in agility of wit, so an empty curiosity titillates him. But in the Italians perhaps, on account of their rare acumen, it stands out the more.

Vaticanus.
He prefers the simple and the dull, to whom he could persuade anything whatsoever. He dreads the Lights of wit, and wishes them extinguished, lest he be detected. Such was once that juggler Alexander the pseudo-prophet—that is, the false prophet—who by his jugglings kept Christians and Epicureans away. Then Calvin himself glories most of all in his acumen of wit, and discourses so cleverly on many things that no one understands them: but he wishes to be alone, that he may traffic with greater profit. He then proceeds, and those who refuse to offer themselves as ministers of his cruelty he calls Disciples of Servetus, in order to render them hated. For this is the custom of certain men, that whoever does not flatter them is blackened with some name from hell: he is called Atheist, or Libertine, or Anabaptist, or some other thing of this kind—which custom indeed they learned from their fathers, who were wont to fight thus: "He is a Samaritan, he has a Demon, why do you listen to him?" By this method of defamation they keep other unskilled men from hearing them, and so obtain the victory without the others being heard. He then says they are like the Midianites, when no Midianites ever differed more among themselves than he with his own. And when he had proposed that he would write against Servetus, in order to recall others to sobriety, he gives the cause of his deed thus.

Calvin 10.
If anyone should object either that it is a cowardly war which is waged against a dead man, and that this is no obscure sign of my diffidence, that I now insult a dead man whom living and speaking I had spared; or that it is cruel to pursue the shade of a dead man: of each charge the defense is ready and easy. For I, as long as there was hope of (1) recalling him to a sound mind, did not cease to expend my labor privately.

Vaticanus.
This is, to Calvin's opinion. For he holds for insane whoever do not feel as he does. But let us pretend Calvin is sound: how could he recall to a sound mind one whom he treated so unjustly? Rhetoricians are wont to give precepts about conciliating the goodwill of the hearers, so that persuasion may be possible. For by him toward whom one has an alienated mind, one cannot be persuaded. Calvin, a good orator, in order to conciliate Servetus's goodwill toward himself, straightway hurried him off into prison, and most diligently shut off all approaches to him from those who could console him or give him counsel. He inflamed all his colleagues against him; he himself most invidiously traduced him, absent in prison, in daily sermons to the people. By these methods, Servetus's goodwill conciliated, he tried to recall him to a sound mind. By Hercules, if Servetus had resolved to hear Calvin and learn from him, he could have been deterred by these iniquities.

Calvin 11.
And lest I detain my Readers with doubtful narrations, I will (1) simply relate only what, two hours before his death, he confessed in the presence of many witnesses to be true. When he had sought a conversation with me, (2) two Senators were sent (3) to lead me into the prison.

Vaticanus.
1. How "simply," we shall soon see. (2) Besides—which is the chief point—he had denied that he would go unless by leave of the Senate. And he who at first had almost compelled the Senate to seize Servetus now dares not approach him, already condemned to death, without a guard. And so the Senators themselves marveled at this childish dissimulation of Calvin. (3) Into the prison Calvin (the Disciple of Christ) is led honorably by Senators: Servetus had been led with utmost ignominy by the lictors. Now compare Christ with Calvin.

Calvin 12.
Asked what he wished, he said that he sought pardon of me.

Vaticanus.
I was expecting that he would confess what you had said a little before—namely, that you had expended your labor privately to heal him. He confesses no such thing, and you mock us, nor do you make good your promise. It is not the same thing to seek pardon and to confess those things. Do you think all men are so dull that no one notices that trick? Stand by your promises; show that he confessed those things. But since you craftily dissemble, I will narrate for you. Servetus was somewhat too irascible. When he had fallen in with Calvin, a man of extreme irascibility, and had been so unjustly treated by him in chains, he was so exasperated that he said many things against him more irascibly than in a Christian manner. What Calvin replied to these, let those who were not present conjecture from his writings and sermons, which he made against him throughout all that time. Therefore Servetus, after he saw that death was at hand for him, began to think about rendering an account to God; and since he had spoken rather intemperately, he sought pardon of Calvin—not on account of doctrine, nor because Calvin had ever done him a kindness, but because Servetus had repaid curses with curses, against the Lord's command. Dissembling these things, Calvin spread darkness over the eyes of readers, as though the modesty of Servetus rendered Calvin innocent. Here comes in that saying in the proverbs: "The rich man, when he has done an injury, threatens besides; the poor man, when he is affected with injury, is compelled to supplicate." Servetus, condemned in his head, seeks pardon of Calvin his condemner. Calvin gave pardon to Servetus neither living nor dead, as this whole book, written accusatorially against him, shows, and the sermons, and the fact that he so bitterly pursues with words and deeds and writings those who dare even to pity Servetus's lot. Behold the shepherd of Christ's sheep, who lays down his soul for his sheep! Behold the Christian man, who does not suffer the Sun to set upon his wrath!

Calvin 13.
But I, having ingenuously stated beforehand (1) that I have never pursued private injuries, admonished him with as much gentleness as I could: that already sixteen years before I had, not without present danger to my life, offered my labor to heal him, and that it had not stood by me but that all pious men might extend a hand to him repenting. Then, that I had dealt with him peaceably by private Letters, and had caught at no ostentation; finally, that no office of goodwill had been omitted by me, until, exasperated by my books and rebukes, (2) he poured out rage rather than bile.

Vaticanus.
1. He denies that he has ever pursued private injuries—he who so burns with lust for vengeance that no one even of the Magistracy dares offend him with the least word, unless he wishes to take on inexpiable enmities. And these things are most well-known to that whole nation. But indeed it is worth the trouble to learn, from what he has written, the man's goodwill toward Servetus. Calvin wrote commentaries on John, to which commentaries Robert Stephanus prefixed a letter, in which he marvelously preaches Calvin's modesty in refuting the opinions of others. On the very first page of those commentaries Calvin attacks Servetus with these words: "Servetus, a most arrogant rascal of the Spanish race." Behold a modesty worthy that Robert should extol it to heaven! But Robert does what the rest of Calvin's Disciples do: they make so much of the man that they vie to celebrate all his deeds and sayings with no judgment, not even considered. The more anyone has praised him, the more there is love of Christ. I will adduce another example of Calvin's modesty toward Servetus. In the Book on scandals, page 59, he writes thus: "For many let one example of Servetus suffice. For he, puffed up with Lusitanian pride, swelling still more with his own arrogance, judged this to be the best way of acquiring a name for himself, if he should tear up all the principles of religion. Whatever, therefore, concerning the three persons in God was once handed down from the very age of the Apostles by the fathers, and received by all the pious through the continuous series of the ages, he not only repudiates as insipid, but harasses and rends with more than atrocious revilings. That canine rage of biting and barking alone, which all the pages of his writings boil over with, sufficiently testifies what sort of spirit goads the man. But if you come to the matter, you will sufficiently perceive that, kindled with a jejune thirst for empty glory, he greedily drank in the most absurd deliriums, with which he might inebriate himself," etc. "Meanwhile he heaps up many wagonloads of speculations, which have so little color that it easily stands clear to any sound man that, only fascinated by a blind love of himself, he could so dote." These are Calvin's words. Let us therefore believe that he offered his life for Servetus's sake—against whom he boiled over with this canine rage of biting and barking (the proof of his goodwill!)—in order to show with what spirit of gentleness he was goaded. And afterward he does not blush, with books published throughout the whole world, to discourse (2) [...], and they who roasted Servetus alive. Behold piety! He ought at least to say this without rage. The rest, which he then sets down, I omit, because I do not have Servetus's books, and to trust Calvin is too dangerous. He then subjoins.

Calvin 14.
When by admonishing and exhorting I profited nothing, I was unwilling (1) to be wise above the master's rule; (2) for from a heretical man who sinned, being self-condemned [autocatacritos], I departed, according to the precept of Paul the Apostle.

Vaticanus.
He craftily is silent about what Servetus replied: and yet he had said above that he would relate what Servetus confessed two hours before his death. (1) The master's rule is to admonish the sinner apart; then, with one or two witnesses brought in; lastly, to tell the Church. Calvin's first admonition was those revilings which we set down above; the second, the prison; the third, the fasces. This method he did not learn from his Master Christ. (2) Calvin, forsooth, in this place calls "heretic" one who, admonished several times, does not obey—and rightly indeed. But it is fitting that the admonition be both good and true. It is good which proceeds from charity: Calvin's admonition was chains—such an admonition could alienate even a friend, so far is it from being able to recall the alienated. A true admonition is about a true matter, and one in which he who is admonished sees himself to sin: as if you should rightly and amicably admonish a drunkard to correct himself, if, admonished several times, he will not obey, he will be obstinate and to be held for a publican. But if Servetus had been amicably admonished by Calvin and according to Christ's precept, and, seeing his errors, had nevertheless obstinately persevered in them, he would rightly be called a heretic by Calvin. But that he was not such, Calvin's own confession shows, who said above that he sought pardon of Calvin himself—which was certainly the act of a mind not stubborn, nor obstinate; nor would Calvin so easily let himself down thus. But if Servetus had so seen his errors as he saw the modesty, it would not have been more grievous to him to confess his errors than (as has been said) to seek pardon of Calvin.

Calvin 15.
That before the people, in a plausible cause, I did not vend myself, fair and good Judges will attribute to modesty, not to timidity.

Vaticanus.
This passage will become clearer from page 663, where Calvin speaks thus: "When at length there had been various and long verbal contest, and he kept repeating that complaint: that it was not fitting for causes of piety to be treated in prison. I replied—what was true, and I had stated at the beginning—that nothing would be more pleasing to me than if it were disputed in the temple and with the whole people listening." Why then was it not done, if it was pleasing to both? But if Servetus afterward refused, why does Calvin attribute this to his own modesty, not to Servetus's refusal? Now, in that he calls the cause "plausible," he speaks of the Trinity, which is therefore plausible to the common crowd, because the crowd knows or comprehends no other Trinity than such as is wont to be painted by the pastors.

Calvin 16.
Nay rather, I was afraid lest, if I undertook to treat that argument from the heart and in earnest, certain malevolent or blasphemous persons might perhaps clamor that I was too eager for fighting.

Vaticanus.
Why then, on a certain Sunday, in a most crowded sermon, did you set forth to the people the opinions of Servetus (who was then recently in prison), and treat them copiously? Did you prefer to fight with the absent than with the present?

Calvin 17.
How preposterous, I beseech you, is that humanity, that, if the disgrace of one man be covered with silence, a thousand souls should be prostituted to the snares of Satan.

Vaticanus.
If Servetus's errors are those snares, then you prostitute a thousand souls to the snares of Satan, who stir them up and move the marsh of Camerina. For although you dissemble many things, and allege many things mutilated, yet by these very things even in your book many will be captured. For the poison will be able to harm drinkers even in your "little glass," however much you pour in of your wine. I myself saw a man who, by Servetus's reasonings cited by you on page 215, about infants not being baptized, was so captivated that he said nothing was plainer. So frigid are your reasonings. Now what sort of thing is it, that he feigns himself solicitous about the salvation of souls, in order that he may cremate bodies—as will afterward appear?

Calvin 18.
Would that Servetus's errors were buried! But while I hear them flit about, I cannot be silent without the fault of perfidy.

Vaticanus.
You yourself are the cause that they flit about; for as there was almost no mention of his earlier book, so this later one could have been sold like others without tumult. Now, after you have burned the man together with his books, all burn with the desire of reading them, and think there was something good in them against you, because you both wished the book to be cremated then, and now try to overwhelm it with curses. You stirred up all these tumults, which without you would have been none.

Calvin 19.
Although an account is to be rendered not so much of this Lucubration as of the penalty inflicted on the man. For whatever has been done by our Senate is everywhere ascribed to me. Nor indeed will I dissemble that by my labor and counsel he was rightly cast into prison. Because, by the received law of this city, it was necessary to prosecute one accused of a crime, and I confess that I prosecuted this cause of his. From which, once he was convicted, that I made no word about the penalty, not only will all good men be witnesses to me, but to the bad too I grant that they may bring it forward if they have anything.

Vaticanus.
At first, when there was a rumor that Servetus had been seized by Calvin's doing, Calvin's friends denied it, in order to defend Calvin from this charge. Now he himself snatches this defense from them: he confesses that it was done with himself as author, but affirms it was done rightly—whether this be true, we shall afterward dispute.

Calvin 20.
But to the extent that I have proceeded, it is not of such importance that the Calumny which either turbulent men, or malicious, or stupid and drunken ones cast upon me, should be purged by a public book. Another cause, as I see, must now be pleaded.

Vaticanus.
Attend.


Vaticanus.
Attend, by the immortal God, to the man's mind and counsel; you will shudder if you truly perceive it. He wishes to show not only that he himself did rightly, but also that all heretics are thus to be treated as Servetus was treated. There comes to mind the counsel of Haman, who counted it for nothing to lay his hands upon one Mordecai alone (for he had heard that he was of the Jewish nation), and rather wished to destroy the whole nation of the Jews that was in the kingdom of Ahasuerus. So this new Haman thinks it too little to have extinguished one man, unless it be granted him besides to do the like to well-nigh the whole human race, as we shall show. For he wishes all heretics to be killed; and he wishes all to be held heretics who dissent from him. So it will come about that all Papists, Lutherans, and Zwinglians, and Anabaptists, and any others there are, are by Calvin's opinion to be put to death, and that there survive on earth only the Calvinians, with the Turks and Jews, whom he excepts. For that all those dissent from Calvin we shall afterward show.

Calvin 21.
Whether it is lawful for Christian judges to punish heretics.

Vaticanus.
I beseech you, readers, that you hear with kindness the sayings of each. This I wish to show: that no firm reason or authority is adduced by Calvin to prove this, and that it is from sole lust of ruling and an unexhausted thirst of blood that he says all these things which he says. Unless I make these things plain, I do not refuse that all should condemn me.

Calvin 22.
And as here I have business with two kinds of men, so I will treat each distinctly, as they deserve. There are many turbulent men today, who, if it were free to them to blurt out whatever they have conceived within, would, in their unbridled audacity, tear up everything. It is no wonder if impunity—the mother of License—so greatly delights these men: easily too will all the Epicureans and Lucianics subscribe, to whose pleasure this one thing is lacking, that what they secretly and enigmatically mutter as sacrileges among themselves, they dare not blare out with full mouth.

Vaticanus.
I beseech you, Master Calvin, if you had a suit about an inheritance with someone, and he asked of the Judge that it be permitted him to speak, and it were not permitted you, would you not say that an injury was being done you? Why do you do to others what you do not wish done to yourself? The suit is about Religion; why do you shut others' mouths? Unless because, ill-conscious to yourself, you fear lest you be detected or overcome, and thus be cast down from your domination. But whom will you call Luther—whom otherwise you are wont to make so much of? An Epicurean, or an ignoramus? For he in his postils, on the 13th chapter of Matthew, speaks thus against you: "But here see how foolish we have hitherto been, who wished to compel the Turks by war, heretics by fire, Jews by fear of death, and others by injuries, to the faith, and to root out the Tares by our own strength—as if we were those in whose power lay hearts and spirits, and in our hand to recall all men to justice and piety. Which if the one God does not do, it remains forever unaccomplished. We in this way truly rather tear men away from the word, by destroying them so that nothing can work in them; and we constitute ourselves guilty (as far as in us lies) of a double slaying: of the body, which we destroy by temporal death, and of the souls, which we thrust into gehenna, afflicting them with eternal death. Afterward we boast that we have rendered obedience to God, and promise ourselves a peculiar reward hence in heaven. By right, therefore, this passage ought to terrify the inquisitors of heretics and those homicides (who, on account of any error whatever which seems so to them, so easily butcher men—if they had not an iron forehead—even if at some time they truly had heretics in their hands). But now they burn up true saints, and are themselves heretics. Which what else is it than to root up the wheat, and to make a show of an uprooting of tares? These things they do, these men truly mad, and besides nothing." See, Calvin: here Luther is condemned by you, and in turn by him you are called a heretic and a homicide and of iron forehead and mad. Hear now your "concord" be preached! But why do I mention Luther alone? A Book has been printed, whose title is: On heretics, whether they are to be persecuted—in which book very many authors are cited, all of whom you condemn. For there are cited Augustine, Jerome, Hilary, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Pellicanus, Luther, Brentius, Otto Brunfels, Urbanus Regius, Caelius Secundus, S. Castellio, Georgius Renbergius, and John Calvin himself, and many others, who all fight against Calvin—whom now Calvin, bound together in one bundle, has cast together with himself into the ashes of Servetus: sending such great funeral-offerings, to be sure, to his enemy—so great is his lust for vengeance. And afterward he dares to say that they mutter sacrileges: as though it were not more likely that he meditates sacrileges and portents, who demands that the power of speaking be permitted to himself alone and to his own.

Calvin 23.
Finally, all who are restrained from writing badly more by fear of penalty than by shame contend that the Church is oppressed by an unworthy tyranny, unless each is free to bring into the light what he has pleased.

Vaticanus.
He thinks all write badly who do not write at his own discretion. And so he demands that they be debarred not only from writing, but even from speaking, so that to himself alone it may be permitted to blurt out anything whatsoever—and he denies this to be tyranny. He then proceeds and disputes certain things against Servetus, which I will not here set down. For I defend not Servetus, but the truth. Toward the end he speaks thus:

Calvin 24.
Besides, whence did he take the distinction between the violation of faith and other crimes, except out of his own brain?

Vaticanus.
This distinction can most easily be taken either from the parable of the sower, where those who received the seed among rocks or among thorns violate faith and fall away from the truth which they had received with joy—this one on account of cares, that one on account of persecutions—and yet no law commands them to be killed. Why? Because they violate faith, but harm not their neighbor: just as neither the envious, nor the avaricious, nor those lustful of vengeance, if they keep these vices shut up within. But if Calvin wishes to kill all these (who nevertheless violate faith, and in God's sight are nothing better than thieves or homicides), who will survive?

Calvin 25.
If he wishes the rigor against heresies to have been mitigated by the coming of Christ, let him bring forward a testimony.

Vaticanus.
How "mitigated"? Before the coming of Christ there is no mention of heretics in the whole Law: and do you there seek the penalty of heretics, where nothing is named? For if you think the rigor not to have been mitigated, show that there was any rigor of the Law against heretics before the coming of Christ; show the name of heretics. Nor indeed do I deny that there were heretics then too; but I do not find a penalty constituted against them by Law. But in the new Testament I find them to be avoided. And so the penalty is neither mitigated nor changed, but constituted in the new Testament and thence to be sought.

Calvin 26.
Forth comes another fanatic from his den, who calls Servetus his best brother, and therefore denies that heretics are to be punished, because each man fashions a sense to the sacred oracles by his own arbitration, so that the certain truth lies as though wrapped in clouds.

Vaticanus.
He is indignant that there is anyone who says the sacred letters are obscure: he himself thinks them open. In which he fights against Zwingli, who thinks them obscure; he fights against himself, who, to open these so very open Letters, has published well-nigh innumerable Commentaries; he fights against all those who hitherto have written so many books about these things, and write daily, so that three ages of man are not enough to read them all. He himself, in the little preface to his Institutes, says that his book of Institutes is a necessary instrument for understanding the Scriptures. Finally, for many years now he daily preaches, writes, disputes, to declare those things which he says are most clear.

Calvin 27.
Thus the "good interpreter" prefers to delete faith from the hearts of men rather than to subject to penalties those who undermine it.

Vaticanus.
He does not delete faith from the hearts of men, who wishes the penalty of heretics to be deferred to the coming of the Judge: unless you wish to accuse Christ himself, who bids the tares be left until the harvest. Nor does he likewise vindicate them from penalties, who wishes them to be punished in their own time by God, not prematurely by men.

Calvin 28.
For what sort of religion will exist? (2) By what marks will the true Church be discerned? (3) What finally will Christ himself be, if the (4) doctrine of Piety be uncertain and in suspense?

Vaticanus.
1. It will be founded in a faith certain about things which are hoped for, not seen—such as was Abraham's, who, bidden to migrate, obeyed, though he knew not whither he went; bidden to slay his son, obeyed, though he was ignorant of the outcome. But his faith was certain, because the faithful God had promised. 2. By Charity, which proceeds from faith, whose precept is certain. For "in this," he says, "shall Men know you to be my disciples, if you love one another." 3. A stone of stumbling to those who wish to believe nothing except what they understand. For faith is of things which are not seen. "Blessed are they who have not seen and have believed." (4) The doctrine of Piety: To love enemies, to do good to those who do us evil; to hunger and thirst after Justice; "Blessed are they who suffer persecution for the sake of Justice": "Woe to you, when all Men speak well of you: for so did they to the false Prophets." These and others of this kind are certain, even if those obscure questions about the Trinity, about Predestination, about Election, and the rest—on account of which men are held heretics, and which many pious men have been ignorant of—be unknown.

Calvin 29.
But how great a reproach to God is it, if he is thus judged (1) ambiguous-speaking [flexiloquus] in his oracles, so as to mock us jestingly? But unless a certain Religion has been delivered in the Scriptures, it follows that we are vainly occupied by him with ambages, nay with fallacies.

Vaticanus.
Nay, how great a reproach to God, unless he be ambiguous-speaking! For if he spoke openly, he would cast pearls before swine, since many swine read the oracles. First, Paul says the Jews have a veiled face while they read the Law, and cannot direct their gaze to Christ, who is the end of the Law: so that the whole Law was to the Jews nothing other than ambiguous-speaking. And the same Moses teaches: "The things that are hidden," he says, "are the Lord our God's; but the things that are open, these are ours, and our sons' forever, for the carrying out of all things that are said in this Law." As if he said this: "The things that in this Law are signified in the ceremonies and the rest, those are hidden from us, laid up with God. But the things which he bids us do—as about loving God and neighbor, about not killing and stealing; and likewise about sacrificing and the rest—these are open to us, as regards obedience, that we may do them: even if those things which lie hidden there, we are ignorant of." For this is true faith and obedience, to attribute so much to God that you do what he bids, even if you know not whither it tends. Isaiah himself calls his oracle a closed Book, which neither the unlettered nor the lettered can understand. At the end of Daniel it is written that that oracle is sealed up until the last time, and will not be understood by any impious men. In the psalms certain enigmas are propounded, which are nothing other than ambiguous-speaking. Here certainly it must be confessed that God is ambiguous-speaking, nor yet has he mocked jestingly, as Calvin calumniates: For it is God's glory to hide the word, and Calvin thinks it a reproach. Nor indeed can it be said that in the new Testament there is no ambiguous-speaking, since there it is written that Christ dealt with outsiders only by parables—that is, ambiguous-speaking—but opened all things apart to the Disciples. From which it appears that the sacred letters cannot truly be understood except by the Disciples of Christ. But the Disciples of Christ are those who obey him and have charity, as was said above: these alone understand them; to the rest indeed, however skilled in all the sciences, they are a Snare. One may see the Apocalypse to be mere enigmas, which can be perceived only by the wise—that is, by those fearing God. For it is a closed Book, which the Lamb alone can open. Paul himself prophesied enigmatically about Antichrist, and the last trumpet, and the coming of Christ. Finally, all things are full of enigmas, which will be the greatest glory of God, when he shall have at the last opened these enigmas to his own—that is, to the pious; and Calvin thinks God is affected with reproach, if he be called ambiguous-speaking—whereas that is at last the true and certain faith, to believe God's ambiguous-spoken sayings, which you do not understand, because you are persuaded that he is truthful. Is nothing then certain? Nay, all things which are necessary for us for attaining salvation, and for obedience and our duty. It is certain that all those things are true which are in the sacred letters. It is certain that Jesus is the Christ, is the Son of God, and did those things which are written of him. It is certain that in our time very many errors have been detected, and those so gross that they can be palpated. The precepts of piety are certain: about loving God and neighbor, about loving enemies, about patience, about mercy, about kindness, and the rest of duties of this kind necessary. But we, negligent of these things which are of our duty, are solicitous about God's duty, and just as if we had been on his councils. About his eternal Election we dispute many things, and about Predestination, and about the Trinity, affirming things which we have never seen, and contemning all the things that are before our feet. Hence are born infinite questions, whose outcome is the effusion of the blood of the poor and the weak, if they will not feel with us.

Calvin 30.
What remains? Except that men of this sort, in order to make a way for their petulance, should utterly remove the Scripture, which is an obstacle?

Vaticanus.
It is mere calumny. He does not remove the Ark of the oracle, who says it is closed. He does not remove the enigmas of Isaiah or Daniel, who says they will be understood at the last time.

Calvin 31.
Meanwhile it appears to be true, what I lately said: that both the Lucianics and the gross contemners of God, and also all the turbulent, plead their own cause, in order that they may with impunity disturb all things, while they are unwilling for Religion to be defended by princes and vindicated by the penalties of the Laws.

Vaticanus.
Here he gravely condemns his own Luther and Augustine, and all the rest whom we cited above, and says that they wish to disturb all things in one bundle, with impunity and safely. Crafty, and like certain robbers, who warn travelers to beware of robbers, in order to avert suspicion. So Calvin, while he wishes to disturb all things, accuses others of this crime, lest anyone suspect this of him. It is certain that in persecutions (such as he here especially contrives) all things are most disturbed—just as he himself, by killing Servetus, disturbed not only his own Geneva, but well-nigh all Europe, and most gravely shook the minds of very many. Now, in that he says others plead their own cause, this he himself does. For once, when he suffered persecution, he wrote against persecution far otherwise than here. And lest anyone doubt about this matter, I will set down his words from the first Institutes: for in the second, in order to plead his own cause, he disturbed all things. Thus, then, he speaks in the first Institutes, Chapter 2, page 144, about the excommunicated: "But those who either do not agree with us in the same faith, or even, if they have a confession on their lips, yet deny by their works the God whom they confess with the mouth (such as those we see in their whole life wicked and lost, drunk with the pleasure of sinning, and sleeping in their evils)—all such men betray by their own marks that they are not at present members of the Church. For this use have excommunications been instituted, by which those should be abdicated from the fellowship of the faithful and expelled, who, falsely pretending the faith of Christ, by the wickedness of their life and unbridled license of sinning are nothing other than scandals of the Church, and therefore unworthy to glory in the name of Christ. First, lest, to the contumely of God, they be named among Christians, as if his holy Church were a conspiracy of malefactors and openly wicked men. Then, lest by frequent association they corrupt others by the example of a perverse life. Lastly, that those very men, confounded with shame, may begin to repent of their baseness, and from that repentance at last learn to come to their senses. Such men indeed we can judge for the time being to be alien from the Church, as far as it is given to discern, and according to that rule of knowledge which we have spoken of. But not even so are they to be despaired of by us, as though cast out beyond the hand of God; and it is altogether a sacrilege to expunge anyone from the number of the elect, or to despair of him as already lost—except those whom it is certainly established by the word of God to be already damned: as if anyone with deliberate purpose and determined malice should oppugn the truth, in order to oppress the Gospel, and extinguish the name of God, and resist the Holy Spirit. For about these it has already been pronounced by the mouth of God, when he said that the sin against the Holy Spirit is not remitted, neither in this age nor in the future. Which can so rarely be perceived by us (if ever indeed it can) that it is of sounder counsel to await the day of revelation, and not rashly to outrun the judgment of God. Let us not arrogate to ourselves more license in judging, unless we wish to limit the power of God, and to dictate a law to his mercy, by which, as often as it has seemed good, the worst are changed into the best, the alien are grafted in, strangers are co-opted into the Church, that he may thus elude the opinion of men and beat back their temerity, lest they dare to usurp the right of judging beyond what is fitting. Rather, effort is to be given that we feel, in mutual candor, the one about the other, as well as can possibly be done; let us take the deeds and sayings of others, in turn, in the best part, not, as the suspicious are wont, twist them obliquely and sinisterly. But if any are so perverse that they do not permit themselves to be well thought of, let us nevertheless commit them into the hand of God, and commend them to his goodness, hoping better things of them, let us nourish peace and charity, and not, stupidly bursting into the more secret judgments of God, involve ourselves in the darkness of errors. And, to absolve it in a single word, let us not abdicate to death the person itself, which is in the hand and arbitration of God, but only let us estimate of what sort each man's works are, out of the law of God, which is the rule of good and evil. In this sense are excommunications to be taken: not such as those by which they should be cast down from the hope of salvation, who before men are abdicated from the flock of the Church, but that they may return into the way, just as Paul writes that he had delivered a man to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord—that is (as I at least interpret), had cast him into a temporary damnation, that he might be saved eternally. And so, although it is not permitted to associate more familiarly or to have closer acquaintance with the excommunicated, through Ecclesiastical discipline, we ought nevertheless to strive by what means we can—whether by exhortation and doctrine, or by clemency and gentleness, or by our prayers to God—that, converted to better fruit, they may receive themselves into the society and unity of the Church. Nor are these only to be so treated, but the Turk too and the Saracens and the rest of the enemies of true Religion—so far is it from being that those methods are to be approved by which they have hitherto endeavored to drive them to our faith, while they interdict them from water and fire and the common elements, while they deny them all the offices of humanity, while they persecute them with sword and arms." These things Calvin then [wrote]; all of which, if anyone compare with what he now does and writes, he will see them as repugnant as Light and darkness are repugnant. For now, having gained strength, he pleads his own cause. And because he has killed Servetus, he wishes all to be killed who dissent from him, and the persons themselves, against his own norm, to be condemned to death. And so it is no wonder if he wishes silence imposed on others: for he fears lest anyone detect this change of his for the worse, and his inconstancy. And so therefore he dreads the light, because he acts badly. Nor indeed is there reason for him to say that he then wrote about a man sinning lightly. Nay, he wrote about those whom we see in their whole life wicked and lost (to use his own words), drunk with the pleasure of sinning, and sleeping in their evils: such as it is scarcely credible that Servetus was, even if all things were now true which Calvin imputes to him. And yet, if he had been such, Calvin ought to have used his own rule against him, not himself to fight so with himself.

Calvin 32.
But now I turn myself to the good and simple, who slip indeed through ignorance, but chiefly, offended by the tyrannical edicts of the Papists, are turned aside from right judgment. They see that, since under the Papacy Religion has been impiously fouled and stuffed with innumerable corruptions, that diabolical confusion is propped up by mere terrors, so that on the contrary to mutter even a single syllable is a capital matter.

Vaticanus.
Who would not mingle heaven with earth, and sea with heaven, if the thief should be displeased at theft, the homicide at Milo? This man inveighs against those who do what he himself does. O shameless forehead, who in this whole Book does this one thing, that he may defend his own with the sword and remove with the sword those who contradict—he complains of the tyranny and terrors of others: while he himself has so filled Geneva with terrors that the very consuls (unless those who are now open enemies) dare not mutter.

Calvin 33.
A just offense indeed, to see the truth of God oppressed with sword and fire, so that no one dares aid it with his patronage; but errors, under the pretext of legitimate judgment, violently hedged about, so that there is no liberty of refuting them. And this complaint is common to all the pious. And so we not only groan in silence, but with clear voice bewail that the wretched world has been reduced to such servitude that no disputation has place, nor do those who lord it under the name of prelates admit any voice dissonant from their decrees: nor finally do they permit one to doubt or to inquire.

Vaticanus.
I could not inveigh more gravely against Calvin than he inveighs against himself. For he does all these things in just the same way which he blames in others.

Calvin 34.
It is a barbarism not to be borne, where no knowledge flourishes, to defend with the sword a possession fortified by no right nor reason.

Vaticanus.
Why then do you defend yours with the sword? Why then was there not, before you, free power for Jerome [Bolsec?], for Gribaldi, for Servetus (to be silent about many others) to dispute from any place? Is there with you liberty in prison? If you have a reason, why are you not content with it? Why do you conduct the matter by force? When you wrote to the King of Denmark, "remove wisdom from the midst, where the matter is conducted by force," why have you removed wisdom from the midst?


Translator's Notes

OCR readings inferred where the character stream was corrupt but the sense recoverable (silent corrections not individually logged; the following are the points a scholar might wish to verify against the original scan):

- Title page date: the source reads "M. D. L. C. XII" which is not a well-formed Roman numeral. The colophon at the foot of the preface and the internal reference to Servetus's death "last year, which was 1553" both fix the edition firmly at 1612. The garbled numeral has been rendered as "1612" accordingly. [Verify against scan.]

- "in public print [Calvire]": the OCR reads "publicis tijpis extenuare et Calvire, defendere conatus est." The word "Calvire" is almost certainly a corruption — possibly an intrusive marginal gloss (a play on Calvin's name, "to Calvin-ize"?) read inline, or a corrupted verb. The bracketed Latin is preserved to flag the uncertainty; the sentence translates coherently without it. [?] [Verify against scan — strong candidate for interleaved marginalia.]

- "to discourse (2) [...], and they who roasted Servetus alive": at the marginal number (2) the OCR reads "disserere (2) Deest, & qui Servetum vivum torruerunt." The word "Deest" ("it is lacking / missing") appears to be an editorial or OCR notation that text is missing here, not part of Castellio's sentence. A clause has dropped out. The translation marks the lacuna with [...]. [?] [Verify against scan.]

- "the fasces" (Calvin 14): "tertia fasces" — fasces here stands for the apparatus of magistral/judicial coercion (the lictors' rods), i.e. the resort to the civil power. Rendered literally; the sense is "the third [admonition was] the magistrate's force."

- "Jerome" (Calvin 34): "Cur ergo Hieronymo" — the reference is most plausibly to Jérôme Bolsec, who clashed with Calvin at Geneva over predestination, rather than to St. Jerome. Identification probable but not certain. [Verify.]

Embedded non-Latin / Greek transliterations:

- "autocatacritos" (Calvin 14): the OCR reads "autochatachritos," a transliteration of Greek αὐτοκατάκριτος ("self-condemned"), echoing Titus 3:10–11 ("a man that is an heretick... is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself"). The OCR form is garbled; corrected silently to the standard transliteration and identified. No surviving Greek script in the OCR at this point — Castellio (or the compositor) appears to have set it in Latin letters. [Verify whether the original uses Greek type.]

- No German, Hebrew, or Greek-script passages were present in this portion of the text.

Scripture wording diverging from the Vulgate/KJV (Rule 9):

- 1 Cor. 4:5 (title page): Castellio's "qui illustraturus est occulta tenebrarum, et patefaciet concilia cordium" follows the Vulgate closely; rendered with KJV phrasing. No meaningful divergence.

- The Luther quotation (within Calvin 22) is Castellio quoting Luther's postil on Matthew 13, not scripture directly; rendered as Castellio gives it.

- "kiss the son" (Preface to the Reader): Castellio quotes Psalm 2 ("filium osculentur") and immediately glosses it polemically via Beza's alleged interpretation ("kill the heretics"). The polemical gloss is Castellio's/the editor's, not the Psalm; preserved as such.

- "Forgive them, for they know not what they do" (Vaticanus on Calvin 2): Luke 23:34, given in KJV form.

- "Woe to you, when all Men speak well of you: for so did they to the false Prophets" (Vaticanus on Calvin 28): Luke 6:26. Castellio's Latin ("Ve vobis, cum de vobis benedicunt omnes Homines") is rendered close to KJV; minor wording, no substantive divergence.

- "Blessed are they who have not seen and have believed" (Vaticanus on Calvin 28): John 20:29, KJV-based.

Inferred speaker attributions (Rule 7):

- All speaker labels ("Calvin 1." through "Calvin 34." and the answering "Vaticanus" turns) are present in the OCR and observed, not inferred — with one exception. After "Calvin 20." the OCR shows "Vaticanus. Attendi." at the foot of one page (this is in fact a catchword/short line) and then "Vaticanus. Attendite per Deum immortalem..." at the head of the next. The duplicated "Attend / Attende" is the catchword stutter described in the prompt; the first short "Attend." has been retained as the opening of Vaticanus's turn and the catchword duplication discarded. No speaker label needed inferring here.

Editorial note on authorship of the prefatory matter: "To the Kindly Reader" is the work of the Dutch editor of the 1612 edition, not Castellio (it refers to Castellio in the third person and to the confederated Provinces of the Low Countries). The "Preface" that follows ("Praefatio") is Castellio's own, opening the dialogue proper. The two are kept formally distinct.

Catchwords and signature marks discarded silently throughout (e.g. "A ij," "A iij," "A 4," "A 5," "B 1," "B iij," "B iiij," "B v" in the margins; catchwords such as "pyrum," "nitate," "Hispani," "credit," "minibus," "stat," "adver.," etc.).
